MEN-7796: Document the upgrade details for Mender Client 5.x (#2506)
mendersoftware/mender-docs: 03.Client-installation/02.Install-with-Debian-package/01.Upgrading/docs.md

are sometimes necessary to fix problems that cannot be dealt with in minor releases, or enable new
behaviors that conflict with existing behaviors in some way.

### Upgrade the Mender Client 4.x series to 5.x series

#### Overview

<!--AUTOVERSION: "In Mender Client %"/ignore-->

> In Mender Client 5.0.0, some Update Modules have been moved from our officially supported repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Mender Client 5.0.0, community Update Modules have been moved from our officially supported repository
```

to the community repository to clarify their support level.

> Below you will find the steps describing how to to get the Mender Client 4.x Update Modules on
> Mender Client 5.x series, taking `deb` Update Module as an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below you will find the steps describing how to to get the community Update Modules, installed by default with  Mender Client 4.x, on Mender Client 5.x series.
The example below will show the case for the `deb` Update Module.
```

> On Mender Client 4.x series, the installed Update Modules alongside the client were:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Mender Client 4.x series, both the community and Norhtern.tech supported Update Modules were installed:
```

* deb
* directory
* docker
* rootfs-image
* rpm
* script
* single-file

> From Mender Client 5.x series onwards, only the following ones are installed alongside the client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From Mender Client 5.x series onwards, the community Update Models are removed, and only the officially supported ones are installed by default alongside the client:
```

behaviors that conflict with existing behaviors in some way.

<!--AUTOVERSION: "to % or later"/ignore-->
### Upgrade the Mender Client 4.x series to 5.x series

#### Overview

<!--AUTOVERSION: "In Mender Client %"/ignore-->

> In Mender Client 5.0.0, some update modules have been removed.

Reviewer 2: Update Module Capital Case everywhere.

Reviewer 2: "some Update Modules have been moved from our officially supported repository to the community repository to clarify their support level.

On Mender Client 4.x series, the installed update modules alongside the client were:
* deb
* directory
* docker
* rootfs-image
* rpm
* script
* single-file

From Mender Client 5.x series onwards, only the following ones are installed alongside the client:
* directory
* rootfs-image
* single-file

> The missing update modules `deb`, `docker`, `rpm` and `script` have been moved to

Reviewer 2: Remove "missing"

[`mender-update-modules` repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/).

> The rest of this section explains how to install any of the missing modules, taking `deb` as an

Reviewer 2: "missing" -> "moved"

example.

#### Install an update module with Yocto

Add an snippet like the following to a `mender_%.bbappend` in your layer:

```
SRC_URI:append = " \
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/master/deb/module/deb;sha256sum=065714b581785a2d7c83b684f0d5348031c5512f21863fed38197078cb3ef6e5 \
"
FILES:${PN}:append = " \
  ${datadir}/mender/modules/v3/deb \
"
do_install:append:qemux86-64 () {
  mkdir -p ${D}/${datadir}/mender/modules/v3
  find ${WORKDIR}
  install -m 755 ${WORKDIR}/deb ${D}/${datadir}/mender/modules/v3/deb
}
```

#### Install an update module with `mender-convert`

Add an snippet like this one to your config file:

```
install_update_module_deb() {
    run_and_log_cmd "mkdir -p work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3"
    run_and_log_cmd "wget -P work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3 https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/master/deb/module/deb"
    run_and_log_cmd "chmod 0755 work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3/deb"
}
OVERLAY_MODIFY_HOOKS+=(install_update_module_deb)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: For a list of all community-supported Update Modules, please see the [Update Module category in the Mender Hub community forum](https://hub.mender.io/c/update-modules).

Author: This line I put it above (and the end of the intro subsection) as it is not mender-convert specific.

behaviors that conflict with existing behaviors in some way.

<!--AUTOVERSION: "to % or later"/ignore-->
### Upgrade the Mender Client 4.x series to 5.x series

#### Overview

<!--AUTOVERSION: "In Mender Client %"/ignore-->

> In Mender Client 5.0.0, some Update Modules have been moved from our officially supported repository
> to the community repository to clarify their support level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you update from Mender Client 4 to Mender Client 5, you will lose the community Update Modules that were previously installed by default. This will happen regardless of the way you're installing the Mender Client.

Below you'll find the steps describing how to modify your settings to get the same behavior on Mender Client 5.
```

Reviewer: The motivation on this rephrasing is to make it explicit whether you'll them if they are already installed, or the just won't be present on new installations.

This is clear for mender-convert and yocto if you're doing an OS image.
But for me it's not clear for the golden image case if someone updates with `apt-get`.

I've rephrased it to assume you'll always lose it, please sanity check that claim.

Author: > But for me it's not clear for the golden image case if someone updates with apt-get.

I will add this (it is the same as you commented below, or?)

example.

#### Install an Update Module with Yocto

Add an snippet like the following to a `mender_%.bbappend` in your layer:

<!--AUTOVERSION: "mender-update-modules/%/deb"/ignore-->
```
SRC_URI:append = " \
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/master/deb/module/deb;sha256sum=065714b581785a2d7c83b684f0d5348031c5512f21863fed38197078cb3ef6e5 \
"
FILES:${PN}:append = " \
  ${datadir}/mender/modules/v3/deb \
"
do_install:append:qemux86-64 () {
  mkdir -p ${D}/${datadir}/mender/modules/v3
  find ${WORKDIR}
  install -m 755 ${WORKDIR}/deb ${D}/${datadir}/mender/modules/v3/deb
}
```

#### Install an Update Module with `mender-convert`

Add an snippet like this one to your config file:

<!--AUTOVERSION: "mender-update-modules/%/deb"/ignore-->
```
install_update_module_deb() {
    run_and_log_cmd "mkdir -p work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3"
    run_and_log_cmd "wget -P work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3 https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/master/deb/module/deb"
    run_and_log_cmd "chmod 0755 work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3/deb"
}

> OVERLAY_MODIFY_HOOKS+=(install_update_module_deb)

Reviewer: All of this should be steps on how to get the 4.0 behavior on 5.0 instead of "here is a way to update one update module".

Misses the example when you do the installation as apt-get.

Author: > All of this should be steps on how to get the 4.0 behavior on 5.0 instead of "here is a way to update one update module".

I don't understand. What exactly are you suggesting in this point? Isn't that covered with the rephrasing that you have suggested above?

> Misses the example when you do the installation as apt-get.

I will add this.

Reviewer: Sorry, I crammed two topics into one comment.
1 topic is adding the `apt-get` part. This seems that we're on the same page and is concluded.

2nd topic was to not give an example for a single update module but a snippet to get you to the previous default state that was available in Mender Clitent 4.

I want to first see how the `apt-get` part will work.
I'm imagining that's a separate package so all community modules will be installed at the same time.
So for apt-get case you the steps to install all the community modules while for yocto and mender-convert you on only get one.

Reviewer: A ok...
Got it.
Didn't know this was the way to install them:

```
mkdir -p work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3
wget -P work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3 https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/master/deb/module/deb
chmod 0755 work/rootfs/usr/share/mender/modules/v3/deb
```

Author: That is the process according to the `mender-update-module` READMEs and Mender Hub tutorials. Doing a new deb package for the modules goes against marking them as community maintained :sweat_smile:

* directory
* rootfs-image
* single-file

The Update Modules `deb`, `docker`, `rpm` and `script` have been moved to
[`mender-update-modules` repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/).

When you upgrade from Mender Client 4.x to Mender Client 5.x, you will lose the community Update
Modules that were previously installed by default. This will happen regardless of the way you're
installing the Mender Client.

Below you'll find the steps describing how to modify your settings to get the same behavior on
Mender Client 5, taking `deb` as an example.

For a list of all community-supported Update Modules, please see the [Update Module category in the
Mender Hub community forum](https://hub.mender.io/c/update-modules/13).

#### Install an Update Module with Yocto

Add an snippet like the following to a `mender_%.bbappend` in your layer:

<!--AUTOVERSION: "mender-update-modules/%/deb"/ignore-->
```
SRC_URI:append = " \
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/master/deb/module/deb;sha256sum=065714b581785a2d7c83b684f0d5348031c5512f21863fed38197078cb3ef6e5 \
"
FILES:${PN}:append = " \
  ${datadir}/mender/modules/v3/deb \
"

> do_install:append:qemux86-64 () {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do_install:append () {
```

This would make it less platform specific?

Author: Yes, of course. Thank you.

  mkdir -p ${D}/${datadir}/mender/modules/v3
  find ${WORKDIR}
  install -m 755 ${WORKDIR}/deb ${D}/${datadir}/mender/modules/v3/deb
}
```

> 

Author: Good call, thanks.

behaviors that conflict with existing behaviors in some way.

<!--AUTOVERSION: "to % or later"/ignore-->
### Upgrade the Mender Client 4.x series to 5.x series

#### Overview

<!--AUTOVERSION: "In Mender Client %"/ignore-->
In Mender Client 5.0.0, some Update Modules have been moved from our officially supported repository
to the community repository to clarify their support level.

On Mender Client 4.x series, the installed Update Modules alongside the client were:
* deb
* directory
* docker
* rootfs-image
* rpm
* script
* single-file

From Mender Client 5.x series onwards, only the following ones are installed alongside the client:
* directory
* rootfs-image
* single-file

The Update Modules `deb`, `docker`, `rpm` and `script` have been moved to
[`mender-update-modules` repository](https://github.com/mendersoftware/mender-update-modules/).

When you upgrade from Mender Client 4.x to Mender Client 5.x, you will lose the community Update
Modules that were previously installed by default. This will happen regardless of the way you're
installing the Mender Client.

> Below you'll find the steps describing how to modify your settings to get the same behavior on

Reviewer 2: Move this right before the next header.

Mender Client 5, taking `deb` as an example.

For a list of all community-supported Update Modules, please see the [Update Module category in the

> Mender Hub community forum](https://hub.mender.io/c/update-modules/13).

Reviewer 2: Maybe remove the /13 at the end? I don't know what it does.

Author: It is part of the URL, `https://hub.mender.io/c/update-modules` redirects to `https://hub.mender.io/c/update-modules/13`.

I think it is the category number. Every category URL in MH has a trailing number.
